#1.cs 61b course Using Objects

##Objects & Methods
<!-- lang:java-->
	String s1; 
	//Step1:declare a String variable.
	s1 = new String(); 
	//Step2: assign it a value: a new empty string.
	String s2 = new String(); 
	//1 & 2 combined.
	s1 = "Yow!";
	//point to a new object;
	s2 = s1;
	//s2 and s1 reference same object.
	s2 = new String(s1);
	//s2 makes a copy of s1

##3 String constructors

	1.new String() constructs empty string - contains no character.
	2."whatever"
	3.new String(s1) takes a paramenter s1. 
	Makes copy of object that s1 references. 
	Constructors always have same name as their class except "stuff in quotes".
	

##Some Java API method
<!-- lang:java-->
	String s1 = "Yow!";
	String s2 = s1;
	s2 = s1.toUppercase();
	//s2 is YOW!
	String s3 = s2.concat("!!");
	//s3 is YOW!!!   or s3 = s2 + "!!";
	String s4 = "*".concat(s2).concat("*");
	//s4 is *YOW!*   or s4 = "*" + s2 + "*";
	

**Notes**

* the object "Yow!" did not change. s2 changed.
* Strings are immutable: their contents never change.

##Java I/O Classes

Objects in System class for interacting with a user.

* System.out is a PrintStream object that outputs to the screen.
* System.in is a InputStream object that reads from the keyboard.
* readLine method is defined on BufferedReader Objects.

How do we construct a BufferedReader? 

* With an InputStream Reader.

How do we construct an InputStreamReader?
	
* We need an InputStream.

How do we construct an InputStream?

* System.in is one.

(Figure this out from online Java libraries API.      **java.io** library)

	InputString: Read raw data.
	
	InputStringReader: Compose into charavters(typically 2 bytes.)
	
	BufferedReader:chars into entire lines of text. 
An example
<!-- lang:java-->

	import java.io.*;
	// to use the Java libaries, other than java.lang,you need to "import them"
	//java.io has ISR, BReader.
	
	class SimpleIO{
		public static void main(String[] arg) throws Exception{
		//java program always starts at a method called "main"
			BufferedReader keybd = new BufferedReader( new InputStreamReader(System.in));
			System.out.println(keybd.readLine());
		}
	}
	
