#口语
##考试形式
独立口语+综合口语

独立口语：有opinion，讲明白

综合口语：没有看过文章，听过听力，也能通过口语讲明白

###task1： personal preference

15 seconds to prepare， 45 seconds to respond

Some people prefer to only take the courses that are related to their future career; others prefer to take a variety of courses. Which do you think is better.

###task2： choice

Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? Nowadays, young people are more informed about world events than their parents were. Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer?

1. 同意。手机获取信息；教育我们国际环境与日常生活也有关系。
2. 不同意。太忙了没有时间；太多绯闻吸引精力。

###task3：campus situation

45s读短文，will disappear。

听一个短文。

总结听力的观点。30s准备，60s response。

可能：1.阅读文章没有读完。

2.听力没有听清楚。

3.为什么觉得好，为什么觉得不好。

###task4：academic course

reading passage（about a term， process， idea），45秒

a listening passage（to illustrate）

combine and convey important information from the reading passage and the lecture excerpt。（30s准备，60srespond）

###task5：campus situation

听

20s准备，60s用来回答。

###task6：choice

听

总结20s准备，60s回答。

##问题很明显

阅读速度太慢：联系压力阅读，掌握出题规律

听力水平太弱：练习跟读模仿，熟记分类词汇

	影子跟读：读熟，读完一个再读下一个。高级口语里所有的sample，独立口语的sample，综合口语和综合写作做过的sample。

时间管理太差：每日仿真联系，习惯计时答题

	看着时间进行练习。不断地回顾。

语言组织困难：大量精读精听，熟记直至内化

逻辑联系不清：练习笔记复述，记忆答题模板

作业：影子跟读练习tpo1综合写作听力，下载《新托福考试专项进阶--高级口语》及其音频， 此后每天进行影子跟读一刻钟至半小时。

###影子跟读法

1. 一开始的时候要看原文：
2. 跟读时的音量调节有讲究
3. 模仿的不只是发音

***


##Task1 

###Type1 Listing

What are the advantages and disadvantages of eating in classroom?

Do you think it's a good idea that some schools require students to finish 40 hours of community service each year?

Do you think college students should be allowed to keep pets in their dormitory?

Nowadays robots are widely used in society. What are the benefits or risks of this?

###Tips for Type 1

a. pay attention to the two opposite sides if they are both mentioned

Sample: What are the advantages and disadvantages of something.

b. you can defend yourself by denying others' thoughts and ideas

Sample: Do you think it is good for somebody to do something?

c. Given signals to make your points easy to follow

Sample: Is doing something a good use of time?

###Type 2 Advice

If a foreign friend of yours plans to study in your country, what suggestion would you like to give him or her?

One of your friends often gets late. What advice do you have for him/her?

Your friend often feels nervous when speaking in front of a large group of people. What suggestions would you give him?

What suggestions would you give to a friend who is starting a new job? Give examples and details in your response.

###Tips for Type 2

a. You can start with a sentense in the topic to help you go

Sample: If a friend of yours is going to do something, what would you suggest?

b. You can give suggestions according to your own experience 

Sample: What suggestions you give a foreign friend who is planning to study in your country?

c. Give at most two suggestions to make your response well-developed

Sample: What advice would you give your frien who is going to ...?

### Type 3 Talk about/describe

Talk about a friend that's special to you. Explain why this person is special to you.

Talk about an activity you would like to attend in the near future and explain your answer in details.

Describe a memorable experience in a restaurant or cafe. Give specific reasons or examples to support your answer.

Describe an interesting clothing in your country. Explain your answer in details.

### Tips for Type 3

a. Find something extremely familar to you to talk about

Sample: Talk about an interesting clothing

b. Try to give more details instead of points about what you describe

Sample: Describe a memorable experience

c. Let your emotion flow if there is any

Sample: Talk about an activity that you like to attend in the near future

##task2

###type1 preference

a. Keep in mind that preference involves two choices

Sample: If you do something, would you prefer A or B?

b. Sometimes you prefer A because you don't like B

Sample: Which do you prefer and why?

c. You can invent your own preference

Sample: Start much earlier or start on the due day?

###Type 2 Best/most

Which one of the following three careers do you think contribute the most to society? Artists/musicians/photographers

If you work as a volunteer at a local hospital, which work do you prefer to do: 1. Read books for patients 2. Chat with the patients 3.Take care of their friends and families

Which one of the following activities do you prefer to do by yourself rather than with a group of people? 1. study 2. exercise 3. shopping. Please include specific details.

###Tips for Type 2

a. Comparing the three of them gives you more details to say

Sample: Which one of the following three do you think is the most ...?

b. The best one is usually the only good one

Sample: Which one do you think is the best among A,B and C?

c. You have to defend yourself by ignoring some truth

Sample: Which one of the following three ways is the best for somebody to do something?

###Type 3 Agree/disagree

Do you agree or disagree with the statement that the wealthy should do more to help the poor? Explain your answer in details.

Do you agree or disagree with the statement that playing video games is a waste of time?

Do you agree or disagree university students should take part-time jobs.

Do you agree or disagree it is necessary for people to go to college in order to succeed?

###Tips for Type 3 

a. There is no time to analyze case by case

Sample: Do you agree or disagree that the wealthy should do more to help the poor?

b. The truth is usually the easiest thing to explain

Sample: Do you agree or disagree with the statement that playing video games is a waste of time?

c. You can defend yourself by denying others' thoughts and ideas

Sample: Do you agree or disagree that college students should have part-time jobs?

***作业：五个素材，整理***

==========================

句子不连贯：积累少。多做shadowing practice。


##Task 3：Campus Situation

45分钟阅读，听150s，30s准备，60s回答

###tips

Timing is important and structure is the key.

Relationship between the reading and the listening is what raters want to hear from us.

###参考答题模板

第一句(10s): The reading material is a letter which suggests/says that 阅读主旨. However, the woman in the conversation doesn't think it's a good idea, and she has two reasons.

第二句(20s):First off, she doesn't think 阅读第一点， and she says that 听力第一点。

第二句(20s): Second, she doesn't believe that 阅读第二点, and she claims that 听力第二点。

第四局(如果有时间): Well, that's why she doesn't like the plan.

##答题模板（针对支持型task 3）

第一句（10s左右）：The reading material is about a decision/plan/notice/policy which XXX. The man/woman in the conversation thinks it's a good idea/welcomes that and he/she has two reasons.

第二句(20s左右): First off, the man/woman agrees that 阅读第一点, and he/she says that 听力第一点。

第三句(20s左右): Second, the man/woman also believes/thinks it's OK that 阅读第二点. He/she points out that 听力第二点.

第四句: Well, that's why he/she likes tha plan/change/policy.(有时间就说，没时间就不说)

##Task 4： Academic Course

Testing format:

1. 45s to read the passage(75-100words) about a theory or a term or phenomenon The passage will not appear again
2. 60-90s to listen to a lecture using examples and details to support the passage. The lecture will only be played once
3. Use the examples in the lecture to explain what has been mentioned in the passage. You have 30s to prepare and 60s to respond

Tips

1. Pay attention to the title(key words)
2. You don't have to mention all the information from both materials

一个中心，两个基本点

或者

一个中心，一个基本点

##task4 参考模板

第一句（15-20s）： The reading passage is about a concept/phenomenon/strategy called xxx, which means xxxxx. The professor in the lecture uses/gives two examples(his own experience)to demonstrate/explain how it works/influences something.

第二句(20s):陈述第一个例子或例子前半部分。In this case, we can see that 阅读分论点1.

第三句(20s):陈述第二个例子或例子后半部分。In this case, we realize that 阅读分论点2.

##Task 5

Test Format:

Listen to a conversation

20 seconds to prepare and 60 seconds to respond

There will be one problem and two possible solutions for solving that problem

1. Briefly summarize the problem as well as the solutions

2. Give your own recommendation with reasons

Frequently concerned topics: Time conflict/deadline(due day)/emergency on campus

###Tips

"Briefly" means you don't have to involve all the information

You need give reasons while suggesting

###参考模板

第一句： The man/woman in the conversation has a problem that xxx/a time conflict between xx and yy, and he/she has two possible solutions.

用时：10-15s

第二句：The first solution is to 第一个方案（仅说方案不讲利弊）。

用时：10s

第三句：And the other option is to 第二个方案（仅说方案不讲利弊）。

用时：10s

第四句：I think the man/woman should take the first/second option, because 分析利弊。

用时：20s-25s

###第五题

训练方法：两边都说。

##task 6

语言精简能力

testing format： 
listen to an excerpt of an academic course introducing a concept/term/phenomenon supported by examples(experiments/explanations/investigations)

Use the points from the lecture/talk, explain why/how/what.

Tips:

Try to summarize, not to repeat

Use the expressions that you can recall, or use the simplest

Keep examples and details close to concepts

***

点题班 live alone or with others:30:28

travel with others or by yourself 33:6

study/work with others or by yourself 34:47

animal in zoo 40:40

biggest chanllege 43:00

university 43:40

library or dorm 46:25

new or old book 47:26

new or old place 51:30

new or old friends 53:30

live/work/travel in big city or countryside 55:50

***

如何精修：4.1：12

***

##复习

###topic development

when you are asked a question, take it as a question.

when you try to prove, make yourself clear.

Don't play with fire, if you can't handle it.

Keep learning is the best preparation.

###information delivery

Do shadow practice as frequently as possible.

Pay attention to the patterns of their pronunciation and intonation.

###Language use

sensitivity & yybility = Intensive reading

#托福范文155篇，口语经常考

ets所有综合口语及综合写作听力和阅读文本

托福范文155篇

子睿范文精选集

托福说说

新托福专项进阶--高级写作

新托福专项进阶--高级口语


影子跟读

综合口语练十套，先模拟练习，精修，看机经

